# Operating System for non-technical people.
If you have been using an electronic device like a mobile phone, a tablet, a laptop or a computer for a while you might have heard the term **operating system**. **Windows** is the one that comes to most of our minds when we hear the term **Operating System** since it's the most popular one with around 72% of the global market share (as of Feburary 2024) of desktop OS. It is a go to option (given that you are not an **Apple** fan) for a regular user due to it's interactive and user friendly interfaces and support for a wide range of applications like games, editing tools etc. but yeah, we have other operating systems too out there like we have the **Linux OS** an open source*, light weight OS widely prefered among developers and tech savy people, the **Mac OS** by **Apple** and for mobile devices we have **Android** which you have probabily heard of and interacted with.

## What is an operating system and what does it actually do?
 A computer broadly consist of two parts the **software** and the **hardware**. All the different things we do on the computer like playing games, listening to music, writing some documents and surfing the internet is done through a software application, like the browser is used to surf the internet, while the actual components of a computer like the keyboard, mouse, the central processing unit(CPU) and the hard disk fall under computer hardware. Underneath the hood the software applications we interact with on the computer boils down to countless calculations(just the usual addition, subtraction, multiplication and division) and the CPU is specialized at performing millions of these in fractions of a second. When software applications are downloaded, it is actually the machine code* of those applications that get downloaded, which are then stored on the computers hard disk and are known as programs. when we start one of them(usually done by double clicking on the application in case of desktop computers and laptops) the applications machine code gets loaded into memory(RAM) and is executed by the CPU. What the user sees on the screen is a result of the execution of the applications code by the CPU. This way the software and the hardware work together to form one of human kinds greatest accomplishments the **modern computers**.

 Now that I have talked about the hardware and the software. So, where does the operating system fall in this picture? The operating system like any other is also a software application but a special one at that. The operating system is the first software that the computer runs when it boots up. To put the computer boot process simply, when a computer is turned on by pressing the power button or through some keyboard commands the first thing it does is perform a self check to ensure that all it's parts are functioning properly(known as power-On Self-Test(POST) in technical terms), after that it loads the operating system into memory(RAM) from the bootable device*. Once the OS is loaded into memory it starts running and displays the login prompt to the user. Continuing with the software starting process discussed earlier, when a user runs an application there needs to be something that knows which program to load into memory and modern day computers are able to run multiple applications at a time so that something also needs to know how to allocate memory and sequence the execution of those applications so that they don't come in conflict with eachother. That something is the **operating system**.

# Conclusion.
The operating system is a crucial component of a computer, so crucial that infact a computer is useless without it. It allows people to interact with computers without having to worry about the complicated working of the computer hardware underneath it. The operating system manages resource allocation like the CPU time and memory, it ensures the security of the computer, manages network connections and communication, organizes, stores and retrieve files securely and schedules and manages execution of processes*.



Open Source: Type of software or technology whose code is made freely available for anyone to see, use, modify and share. You can find the code for the linux operating system on this link https://github.com/torvalds/linux.git.

Machine code: The representaion that computer hardwares can understand. Consist of 0s and 1s. All high level code is boiled down to machine code before execution on the CPU.

Bootable device: A storage device where the computers operating system is stored and can be a USB flash drive or the computer hard disk.

Process: When programs are loaded into memory they are known as processes.